Adding guidance for the data pipeline (#7)
Defra-pEPR-Modelling-Team/module_b_team_pages: lapcap_handbook.Rmd

Named individuals correct as of 3/2/2025

### Model Versioning {#model_versioning}

We use a process of model versioning designed to allow easy rolling-back to past versions.

In version Vx.y.z

-   The first number, x, should be updated when figures are published externally (including publishing letters, use in public base fees etc.)
-   The second number, y, should be updated when figures are shared non-publically (e.g. with Simpler Recycling, MHCLG, DESNZ etc.)
-   The third number, z, should be updated when there are changes to the data inputs or the data pipeline (to allows rolling back to the correct data in the future)

> #### How to update the tagged version {#model_tagging}
> 
> When a new version of the model needs to be tagged on GitHub, follow the below steps:
> 
> 1.  Create a branch from dev
> 2.  Change the model_version parameter in run_LAPCAP_model (in main.R) and the model_version parameter in the data_pipeline function in update_data_pipeline.R. Commit and push these changes to your branch
> 3.  Run the data pipeline with the new model_version parameter to create a folder on the aws bucket containing all the data for that version of the model (remembering to restart your R session and clean your environment before running the pipeline) - see [here](#how_to_data_input) for full data pipeline guidance
> 4.  Ensure that the data pipeline and model both run with the new model_version parameter
> 5.  Open a pull request (PR) to merge your branch back into dev
> 6.  Merge the branch into dev (following any QA processes) and delete the now-redundant branch
> 7.  Tag the commit on dev with the new model version using GitHub's tagging feature
> 8.  Optionally, if publishing externally and updating the first number in the model version, you should now open a PR and merge dev into main
> 
> Ensure that the rest of the team are aware of the version being tagged so they can rebase their branches if necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> #### How to update the tagged version {#model_tagging}
> 
> When a new version of the model needs to be tagged on GitHub, follow the below steps:
> 
> 1.  Create a branch from dev
> 2.  Change the model_version parameter in run_LAPCAP_model (in main.R) and the model_version parameter in the data_pipeline function in update_data_pipeline.R. Commit and push these changes to your branch
> 3.  Run the data pipeline with the new model_version parameter to create a folder on the aws bucket containing all the data for that version of the model (remembering to restart your R session and clean your environment before running the pipeline) - see [here](#how_to_data_input) for full data pipeline guidance
> 4.  Ensure that the data pipeline and model both run with the new model_version parameter
> 5.  Open a pull request (PR) to merge your branch back into dev
> 6.  Merge the branch into dev (following any QA processes) and delete the now-redundant branch
> 7.  Tag the commit on dev with the new model version using GitHub's tagging feature
> 8.  Optionally, if publishing externally and updating the first number in the model version, you should now open a PR and merge dev into main
> 
> Ensure that the rest of the team are aware of the version being tagged so they can rebase their branches if necessary.

```

b.  If the changes involve updating a data import then the data pipeline must be refreshed and data logs updated:

> > ### How to change the data pipeline or a data input {#how_to_data_input}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ### How to modify the data pipeline {#how_to_data_input}
```

>

> > When working on or updating the data pipeline itself (experimentation, testing, logic changes etc.) or updating/changing a data source, you should **ensure you have changed the model_version parameter in any calls to the data_pipeline function** -- this prevents you from accidentally overwriting data being used by the "live" model and ensures rolling-back to versions is easy in the future.
> >
> > The pipeline will tell you if you are going to overwrite any data.
> >
> > You should use a unique string for your model_version parameter e.g. "your_name_test".
> >
> > Once you have finished your experimentation/changes make sure to update the model_version parameter to the correct model version number before merging back into dev, and delete any temporary folders you created in aws using your model_version parameter. Follow the [Model Versioning guidance](#model_tagging) to update the model version and run the pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** When working on or updating the data pipeline itself (experimentation, testing, logic changes etc.) or updating/changing a data source, you should **ensure you have changed the model_version parameter in any calls to the data_pipeline function** -- this prevents you from accidentally overwriting data being used by the "live" model and ensures rolling-back to versions is easy in the future.
>
> The pipeline will tell you if you are going to overwrite any data.
>
> You should use a unique string for your model_version parameter e.g. "your_name_test".
>
> Once you have finished your experimentation/changes make sure to update the model_version parameter to the correct model version number before merging back into dev, and delete any temporary folders you created in aws using your model_version parameter. Follow the [Model Versioning guidance](#model_tagging) to update the model version and run the pipeline.
```

>

> > #### Running the Data Pipeline:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> #### **Running the Data Pipeline:**
```

>
> To run the data pipeline, run the update_data_pipeline.R script. This will update to the lastest version of the LAPCAP package, load all of the pipeline scripts, and run the pipeline (including saving the outputs to the aws bucket). This will create a new folder of processed data at "Module_B1/Inputs/Processed/" named after the model_version parameter.
>
> There are dependencies between the sub-pipelines (e.g. waste flow using data from scheme data), so they will need to be run in order in any experimentation.
>
> If you are running pipeline functions outside of the pipeline itself, you will likely need to define the following variables:

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>
```

> ```{r}
s3_bucket <- "s3-ranch-043"
root_folder <- "Module_B1/Inputs"
file_log <- list()
> ```
>

> > #### Updating the data pipeline itself:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> #### **Updating the data pipeline itself:**
```

>
> 1. Follow the guidance above to prevent overwriting data that is (or will be) used
>
> 2. Experiment and make the changes needed to the code
>
> 3. Update the model_version parameter to the next model version (following the [Model Versioning guidance](#model_tagging)) in both the argument to data_pipeline() in update_data_pipeline.R and the argument to run_LAPCAP_model() in main.R
>
> 4. Run the pipeline to create a folder of data for that model version
>
> 5. Open a PR and merge your changes into dev
>
> 6. Follow the Model Versioning guidance about tagging the new model version on dev
>

> > #### Updating a data source:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> #### **Updating a data source:**
```
